# Truffula
Jupyter notebooks for the analysis of data associated with the maize Truffula mutant 

These jupyter notebooks contain all of the bash, R, and Python code used to anlayse data associated with the paper "Dominant mutants reveal a conserved method of class-B ARF regulation in land plants revealing a ~500myo piece of the auxin signalling puzzle" 
Authors: Michael J. Prigge1, Nicholas Morffy2, Amber de Neve3,4, Whitnie Szutu1, Jazmín Abraham Juárez5, Kjel Johnson3,4, Nicole Do1, Meirav Lavy1, Sarah Hake3,4, Lucia Strader*2, Mark Estelle*1, Annis E. Richardson*3,4,6§
(1) UCSD
(2) Duke University
(3) USDA Plant Gene Expression Center, 800 Buchanan Street, Albany, CA 94710. 
(4) Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California Berkeley, CA. 
(5) Jazmin’s address
(6) Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
*Co-corresponding Authors
§ current location

Truffula is a dominant, EMS-induced maize mutant. The phenotype was assessed in both the original Mo17, and W22 backcross (10 generations) inbred backgrounds. 

_Phenotyping Maize Populations_
Field grown plants were grown at UC Berkeley Gill Tract, UC Davis and UMass Amherst during summer field seasons. All plants used for molecular analysis were backcrossed into W22 10 times. Seedlings grown for RNA and DNA extractions were grown under greenhouse conditions in 30X45X2.5cm trays with peat free soils plus osmocyte. Seedlings grown for immunolocalization and western blots were grown in temperature-controlled greenhouses with supplemental light in 30X45X2.5cm trays with peat-reduced osmocote compost with added fertiliser under 16/8 day/ night cycle. 

_ZmARF28 Protein Quantification_
3-week-old maize seedling shoot apices were harvested and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, before grinding to a fine powder. 100mg of powdered tissue was then thawed in 1x SDS+DTT loading buffer and vortexed. Samples were heated at 95˚C for 5 minutes, before loading on a 10% acrylamide gel for electrophoresis. Semi dry transfer to a MeOH activated PVDF membrane in 1X Tris-Glycine/20% MeOH was carried out. Membranes were air dried, then reactivated in MeOH and washed in TBS/0.05% Tween for 5 minutes. Then, Blocked for 1 hour with 6% skimmed milk in TBS/0.01% Tween at room temperature. Membranes were incubated overnight in the primary AntiARF28 antibody diluted 1:250 in 1% milk/TBS/0.05% Tween. The following day membranes were washed (3x 5 mins in TBs/0.05% Tween) and incubated with 1:5000 Anti-guinea pig-HRP secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific catalog no. A18769) at room temperature with rocking for 2 hours. After washing 4x 5 mins in TBS/0.05% Tween membranes were incubated with Clarity Western  ECL substrate (Biorad catalog no. 1705060) and exposed to x-ray film. Film was exposed to the membrane for 10 minutes before developing. This experiment was repeated four times with similar results.

_Arabidopsis Protoplast Expression and Quantification_
Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts were isolated from 14-day-old Col-0 leaves. 100,000 cells were transformed with 20-30 μg of plasmid DNA carrying mNEON-ARF2-P2A-mScarlet3 or mNEON-arf2T298N-P2A-mScarlet3 constructs using the tape-sandwich method and incubated for 16 hrs in the dark (7). Transformed cell populations were scored using the Beckman Coulter Cytoflex S Flow Cytometer and CytExpert software. A back gating strategy was taken to identify the population of intact protoplasts. Cells expressing mScarlet3 reporters were first identified by comparing transformed mNEON-ARF2-P2A-mScarlet3 cells to untransformed cells using the using the Y610 channel (Ex: 561 nm Em: 610±20 nm, 1000 gain) and then back gated on FSCvSSC. Cells were treated with 100µM cycloheximide diluted in protoplast media. for the indicated times.A minimum of 162 mScarlet3 positive cells from six independent transformations were used to collect mScarlet3 reporter levels. The mNEON levels were collected using the B525 channel (Ex: 488 nm Em: 525±40 nm, 69 gain). FCS files for mScarlet3 positive cell populations were generated by Cytoflex and analyzed using FlowKit (8), NumPy (9), and Pandas (https://zenodo.org/record/7979740) packages in python with custom scripts. Ratios were determined by taking the mNEON signal divided by the mScarlet3 signal on a per cell basis. The mean ratio of each replicate at timepoint 0 was generated and all cells from that replicate were normalized to this value. A minimum of 2166 cells across all 6 replicates were collected. Graphs were generated using seaborn (10) and matplotlib (11) in python.

_Maize plants_
The original Truffula seed was provided by Gerry Neuffer, and originally called Ts-2620, found in EMS mutagenised Mo17 population. The phenotype of Trf was analysed in backcrosses into W22 and Mo17 advanced to generation 10. Field grown plants were grown at UC Berkeley Gill Tract, UC Davis and UMass Amherst during summer field seasons. All plants used for molecular analysis were backcrossed into W22 10 times. Seedlings grown for RNA and DNA extractions were grown under greenhouse conditions in 30X45X2.5cm trays with peat free soils plus osmocyte. Seedlings grown for immunolocalization and western blots were grown in temperature-controlled greenhouses with supplemental light in 30X45X2.5cm trays with peat-reduced osmocote compost with added fertiliser under 16/8 day/ night cycle. 

_DNA Extraction_
Leaf discs were collected from 80 Trf and N siblings in the W22 backcross population (10 introgressions). High-quality gDNA was extracted using urea as described previously (1). In brief, genomic DNA was extracted using a urea based extraction method  which is as follows. Tissue was ground in urea extraction buffer (4M urea, 4M NaCl, 1M Tris pH8, 0.5M EDTA, 34mM n-lauroyl sarcosine). Then an equal volume of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1), was added and vortexed to mix. After centrifugation, the supernatant was decanted and mixed with an equal volume of chloroform. After centrifugation, the supernatant was decanted and mixed with 1/10th volume of 4.4 M NH4OAc pH 5.2 and 0.7 volume of isopropanol. Strands of DNA were then collected and washed with 70% ethanol in a separate tube. The dried pellet was resuspended in 100ul of TE. DNA integrity was checked using gel electrophoresis and quantified using qubit before sending for library preparation and 50bp PE sequencing by Novogene. Sequencing was for 10 x coverage of the maize genome. 

_Whole-Genome Sequencing Bulk-segregant Analysis_ 
Sequence data was downloaded via ftp from Novogene servers and passed through the following analysis pipeline: FASTPQ (2) > Bowtie2 alignment to the B73_Reference_Nam5.0 genome > samtools mpileup variant calling (REF) > SNPeff (REF) and variant filtering in R, restricting to EMS type SNPs. Jupyter notebooks containing the code for WGS-BSA analysis is available at: https://github.com/ThePlantShapeLab

_RNA Extraction_
A segregating population of 3-week-old maize seedlings were first genotyped for Trf (see Table S1 for primers). The outer 2 leaves were removed and 0.5cm of the shoot apex was dissected and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Three replicate pools were created for Trf and N siblings, 10 individuals per pool. RNA was extracted from each pool using TRIzol® (Invitrogen) as described in the users manual. RNA quality was checked using gel electrophoresis and quantified using qubit before sending for library preparation and 50bp PE sequencing by Novogene. 

_RNAseq Analysis_
Sequence data was downloaded via ftp from Novogene servers and passed through the following analysis pipeline: FASTPQ (2) > HiSAT2 (3) alignment to the Zea mays Reference NAM5.0 genome > FeatureCounts (REF)> DeSeq2 (4) analysis of differential gene expression using genes with more than 5 counts in 3 or more samples. All analysis was carried out locally (3.6GHz 8-Core Intel Core i9 processor, 32GB RAM) using R packages combined with Jupyter notebooks. Jupyter notebooks containing the code for RNAseq analysis is available at:       https://github.com/ThePlantShapeLab GO term analysis was carried out using the GAMER Maize annotations (REF) and the GOSeq R package (REF), significantly enriched GO terms had a Benjamini and Hochberg cutoff padj value of <0.05.
